---
layout: post
title: The subtheory $PA^-$
---

This is a summary of ch2 of Kaye. In the previous entry I considered
models for all of $\Th\N$. Now I consider a subtheory $PA^-$, which
are essentially the Peano axioms without induction. To be specific,
the axioms consist of:

1. Axioms for a commutative semiring with operations $+$ and $\cdot$
(i.e. a commutative ring except additive inverses are not required)

2. Axioms for a linear order $<$

3. $<$ preserves $\cdot$ and $+$ : $\forall x,y,z(x<y\to x+z<y+z)$
and $\forall x,y,z(0<z\land x<y\to x\cdot z<y\cdot z)$

4. $<$ is a discrete order: $0<1$, $\forall x(x>0\to x\ge1)$ and
$\forall x(x\ge 0)$

5. Smaller elements can be subtracted from larger elements: $\forall
x,y(x<y\to \exists z(x+z=y))$. It can be proven using the other axioms
that $z$ is unique.

Obviously $\N$ is a model. What is different from before is that now,
we can construct lots of nonstandard models without appealing to
compactness. Before I do so, let me point out a correspondence between
models $M\vDash PA^-$ and discretely ordered commutative *rings*
$R$ (with additive inverses). Given $M$, we can construct $R$ as the
quotient $M^2/\sim$, where

$$(a,b)\sim(c,d) \iff a+d=b+c.$$

Think of $(a,b)$ as a formal representation of the difference
$a-b$. We then define $+$, $\cdot$ and $<$ in the natural way and
check that it forms a discretely ordered commutative ring. On the
other hand, given a discretely ordered commutative ring $R$, the
subset $\{x\in R\mid x\ge0\}$ forms a model of $PA^-$. This justifies
calling $PA^-$ *the theory of non-negative parts of discretely
ordered rings*. As we'll see, this correspondence is useful because it
is often more convenient to construct both positive and negative
elements at once, then restrict our attention to non-negative
elements.

Also, one more remark: when defining $<$ on an ordered ring it
suffices to specify the positive elements, because $x>y\iff x-y>0$.

### Some nonstandard models

Our first example involves the polynomial ring $\Z[X]$. I define a
polynomial $p(X)$ to be positive iff its leading coefficient is
positive. So $X^2-2X-1$ is positive, whereas $-X$ is not. Think of $X$
as an infinitely large element, so the 'positiveness' of $X^2$
outweighs the 'negativeness' of $-2X-1$. Anyway, we have a discrete
order on $\Z[X]$, and we take the model to be the subset $\Z[X]^+$ of
non-negative elements.

A few remarks. First, if we had used $\N[X]$ instead of $\Z[X]^+$,
then the last axiom in the above list won't be satisfied: we have
$1<X$ but there is no $z\in\N[X]$ satisfying $1+z=X$, Whereas in
$\Z[X]^+$ we have $z=X-1$. This illustrates the importance of allowing
polynomials with negative coefficients.

Second, $\Z[X]^+$ does not satisfy $\Th\N$ because we have
$\Z[X]^+\nvDash \exists x\forall y(2y\neq x\land 2y+1\neq x)$. To see
this, let $x=X$ and observe that either $y$ is a standard natural in
which case $2y<2y+1<X$, or the coefficient of some power $X^k$ in $y$
is positive, in which case $2y+1>2y>X$. Therefore, $PA^-$ cannot prove
all sentences in $\Th\N$.

Third, the earlier remark that $X$ is an 'infinitely large' element
actually holds some weight. Given a nonstandard model $M\vDash\Th\N$
and $a\in M\setminus\N$, we can embed $\Z[X]^+$ as a substructure of
$M$ by mapping $p(X)\mapsto p(a)$. If you're astute, you might notice
this is not a valid definition: we can't just map $X-1$ to the element
$a-1$ because $a-1$ is not even a valid $\cL_A$-term! A bit more work
has to be done to make the definition work, which I do in the
following proposition.

**Proposition.** $\Z[X]^+$ embeds as a substructure of $M$.

*Proof.* Let $p(X)\in\Z[X]^+$ and $a\in M\setminus\N$. I split $p(X)$
into two polynomials $q(X),r(X)$, where $q(X)$ contains the positive
monomials and $r(X)$ contains the negative ones. For instance,

$$p(X)=X^3-4X^2-2X+1 \implies q(X)=X^3+1,\;r(X)=4X^2+2X.$$

If $p(X)$ has all positive coefficients then I set $q(x)=p(X)$ and
$r(X)=0$. Now $q(a)$ and $r(a)$ are valid $\cL_A$-terms. Furthermore,
we have $r(X)<q(X)$ which implies $r(a)<q(a)$; this follows from the
inequality $a^k>s(a)$ for all polynomials $s$ with degree
$<k$. Therefore, since $M\vDash PA^-$ there is a unique $z$ satisfying
$r(a)+z=q(a)$. We map $p(X)$ to $z$.

It remains to check that this map respects $<$, $+$ and $\cdot$ for
all polynomials. Note that respecting $<$ automatically implies it is
an embedding. Suppose $p(X)=q(X)-r(X)<q'(X)-r'(X)=p'(X)$. Then we have

$$r(a)+z=q(a) \quad\text{and}\quad r'(a)+z'=q'(a)$$

where $p(X)\mapsto z$ and $p'(X)\mapsto z'$. Then

$$q(a)+r'(a)+z'=r(a)+r'(a)+z+z'=q'(a)+r(a)+z.$$

Observe that $q(X)+r'(X)<q'(X)+r(X) \implies q(a)+r'(a)<q'(a)+r(a)$,
so we are forced to have $z'>z$, and order is preserved. Next, we have

$$(r+r')(a)+(z+z')=(q+q')(a)$$

where $p(x)+p'(X)=(q+q')(X)-(r+r')(X)$, so addition is preserved. Lastly, by multiplying both equations and adding $r(a)r'(a)$ we get

$$\begin{align*}
    q(a)q'(a)+r(a)r'(a) &= r(a)r'(a)+r(a)r'(a)+r(a)z'+r'(a)z+zz' \\
    &= r(a)(r'(a)+z')+r'(a)(r(a)+z)+zz' \\
    &= r(a)q'(a)+r'(a)q(a)+zz',
\end{align*}$$

which matches up with the fact that 

$$\bigl(q(a)-r(a)\bigr)\bigl(q'(a)-r'(a)\bigr)=q(a)q'(a)+r(a)r'(a)-\bigl(q(a)r'(a)+q'(a)r(a)\bigr),$$

so multiplication is preserved. $\qed$

The second example is a general template for constructing models of
$PA^-$ not satisfying certain sentences in $\Th\N$, which involves
taking quotients of polynomial rings over $\Z$.

1. We construct a discrete order on $R=\Z[X,Y]/(X^2-2Y^2)$ so that the
non-negative elements form a model of $PA^-$ satisfying $\exists
x\exists y(x^2=2y^2)$, which is not in $\Th\N$.
    
    Let $P$ be the subset of $R$ consisting of polynomials with
    constant coefficient 0, along with 0. It is a rng (ring without
    1). There is a rng homomorphism $P\to\R$ which maps
    $X\mapsto\sqrt2$ and $Y\mapsto1$. By an analogue of the first
    isomorphism theorem, we have an embedding $P/(X^2-2Y^2)\to\R$. The
    order on $\R$ induces an order on $P/(X^2-2Y^2)$ which is dense.
    
    Then, we replace each point in $P/(X^2-2Y^2)$ with an ordered
    $\Z$-chain corresponding to some coset $\overline{p(X,Y)}+\Z$ with
    $\overline{p(X,Y)}\in P/(X^2-2Y^2)$, and this gives us a discrete
    order. Note that each coset can be identified with a subset of
    $R$, and they form a partition.
    
    This construction illustrates the general idea: we take any
    ordered ring satisfying some property that is not satisfied in
    $\N$, then 'expand' each point into a $\Z$-chain in order to turn
    it into a discrete order.
    
2. This time let $R=\Z[X,Y,Z]/(XZ-Y^2)$. The significance of this ring
is that $Y$ is irreducible but not prime, implying that the two
formulas
    
    $$\text{prime}(x) = x>1\land \forall y,z,w(xw=yz\to \exists v(xv=y\lor xv=z))$$
    
    and

    $$\text{irred}(x) = x>1\land \forall u,v(uv=x\to u=x\lor v=x)$$

    are not equivalent in $PA^-$.
    
Define $P$ in the same manner as above, and define a rng
homomorphism $\varphi:P\to\R$ mapping $x\mapsto e$,
$y\mapsto\sqrt{e\pi}$ and $z\mapsto\pi$. It is crucial that there are
no algebraic relations between the images apart from
$\varphi(x)\varphi(z)=\varphi(y)^2$; also note that
$\varphi(x)<\varphi(y)<\varphi(z)$. So we have an embedding
$P/(XZ-Y^2)\to\R$ and the rest follows as above. Note that we might
have different orders on $R$ depending on the choice of images of
$\varphi$.

### Basic properties of models of $PA^-$

Recall that if $M\vDash\Th\N$ then $\N$ is an initial segment of $M$
(denoted $\N\subseteq_c M$). The same is true if $M\vDash PA^-$. The
proof relies on showing for each $k\in\N$ that

$$PA^-\vdash \forall x(x\le\underline{k}\to x=\underline0\lor
x=\underline1\lor \ldots\lor x=\underline{k-1}).$$

I'll omit the details of because it's boring and tedious. Analogously,
every model $M\vDash PA^-$ has an end extension $N\vDash PA^-$,
i.e. $M\subseteq_c N$. Namely, we take $N=R[X]^+$ where $R=M^2/\sim$
is the discrete ordered ring induced by $M$, and there is a natural
embedding $M\to R\to R[X]^+$. Note the special case $M=\N$ and $R=\Z$.

Initial segments are related to a certain class of formulas called
*$\Delta_0$ formulas*. They have the form $\exists x(x<t\land
\varphi(x))$ (abbreviated $\exists x<t(\varphi(x))$) or $\forall
x(x<t\to \varphi(x))$ (abbreviated similarly), where $t$ is an
$\cL_A$-term and $\varphi$ is quantifier-free. Such formulas are said
to have *bounded quantifiers*, and their truth and falsity can
be computed by simply checking all numbers up to $t$. The notion of
$\Delta_0$ formulas being computable will be made precise in the
following entry.

If $M\subseteq N$ are $\cL_A$-structures, then there is a notion of
$M$ being a *$\Delta_0$-elementary substructure*, denoted
$M\prec_{\Delta_0} N$. There is also a variant of the Tarski-Vaught
criterion but for $\Delta_0$ formulas. The reader can easily give a
definition and prove the variant. Now this is where initial segments
come in:

*Proposition.* If $M\subseteq_c N$ are
$\cL_A$-structures, then $M\prec_{\Delta_0} N$. In particular we can
take $M=\N$.

*Proof.* We verify the Tarski-Vaught criterion. Let $a_1,\ldots,a_n\in
M$ and $t(a_1,\ldots,a_n)$ be an $\cL_A$-term, and suppose there is
some $b\in N$ such that $N\vDash b<t(a_1,\ldots,a_n)\land
\phi(b,a_1,\ldots,a_n)$. Then $b\in M$ because $M$ is an initial
segment and so

$$\{y\in N \mid y < t(a_1,\ldots,a_n)\} = \{y\in M \mid y < t(a_1,\ldots,a_n)\}.$$

Thus $M$ also satisfies that formula as desired. $\qed$

One level up from $\Delta_0$, we have $\Sigma_1$ and $\Pi_1$ formulas,
which are formulas of the form
$\exists\overline{x}\,\phi(\overline{x},\overline{y})$ and
$\forall\overline{x}\,\phi(\overline{x},\overline{y})$ where $\phi$ is
$\Delta_0$. In other words, $\Sigma_1$ formulas start with a sequence
of unbounded existential formulas followed by a $\Delta_0$-formula,
and similarly for $\Pi_1$. By convention, $\Delta_0$ formulas are
considered to be also $\Sigma_1$ and $\Pi_1$.

It is easily verified that $\Sigma_1$ and $\Pi_1$ are closed under
conjunction and disjunction, the negation of $\Sigma_1$ is $\Pi_1$ and
vice versa. In fact, $\Delta_0$, $\Sigma_1$ and $\Pi_1$ are part of a
larger hierarchy called the *arithmetic hierarchy*. The reader
might notice huge parallels with the Borel hierarchy.

I will also use $\Sigma_1$ to denote the set of $\Sigma_1$ formulas,
and similarly for the other types.

**Corollary.** $PA^-\vdash \Sigma_1\cap\Th\N$.

*Proof.* If $M\vDash PA^-$ then $\N\subseteq_c M$. Suppose
 $\N\vDash\exists x\,\theta(x)$ where $\theta\in\Delta_0\cap\Th\N$. So
 there is some $a\in\N$ such that $\N\vDash\theta(a)$. Clearly $a$
 also lies in $M$, and by the proposition we have $M\vDash\theta(a)$,
 so $M\vDash\exists x\,\theta(x)$ as desired. $\qed$

So $PA^-$ can prove as a substantial amount of true sentences in $\N$,
but not all of them as seen in the above examples. In fact, no
reasonable extension of $PA^-$ can prove all of $\Th\N$ by Gödel's
first incompleteness theorem, which is the subject of the next entry.