---
layout: post
title: Normalised root towers for solvable extensions of $\Q$
---

A *normalised root tower* for an extension $K/F$ is a root tower with
prime indices. In this entry I will prove that the splitting field of
every solvable polynomial can be imbedded in a field admitting a
normalised root tower, and then I compute them for some specific
examples.

I use $z_n$ to denote the primitive $n$th root of unity $e^{2\pi
i/n}$. I make heavy use of the following lemma from Jacobson which
gives a criteria for a radical extension.

**Lemma (Jacobson).** Let $p$ be a prime and suppose $F$ contains $p$
  distinct $p$th roots of unity. Let $E/F$ be cyclic and
  $p$-dimensional. Then $E=F(d)$ where $d^p\in F$.

Before proving the result for general solvable extensions, I focus on
a simpler case.

**Lemma.** For every prime $p$, every cyclotomic field $F(z_p)/F$
  can be imbedded in a larger extension $K/F$ admitting a normalised
  root tower.

*Proof.* The Galois group $\Gal(F(z_p)/F)$ is abelian and hence admits
a series of normal subgroups

$$1 = G_1\subset G_2\subset \cdots \subset G_k = G,$$

where each $p_1=[G_{i+1}:G_i]$ is prime. This corresponds to a tower of
simple extensions

$$F\subset F(x_1)\subset F(x_1,x_2)\subset \cdots\subset F(x_1,\ldots,x_k) = F(z_p).$$

Although the degrees are all prime, the base fields of each extension
$F(x_1,\ldots,x_{l+1})/F(x_1,\ldots,x_l)$ do not necessarily
contain the requisite roots of unity, and thus it may not be a
radical extension. Thus we need to augment each base fields to
construct our desired root tower.

Firstly, we have $p_1=[F(x_1):F]<p$, and so by induction there
exists a normalised root tower from $F$ to $F_1$ where $F_1\supset
F(z_{p_1})$. Since $F_1$ contains the required $p_1$th roots of
unity, we can take it to be the new base field and 'lift up' the
extension $F(x_1)/F$ to obtain $F_1(x_1)/F_1$. Since $F(x_1)$ is
normal, it is the splitting field of $x_1$'s minpoly $p(x)$ over $F$,
and thus $F_1(x_1)$ is also the splitting field of $p(x)$ over
$F_1$. Thus we can conclude by Jacobson that $F_1(x_1)/F_1$ is a
radical extension, and consequently it has degree either 1 or
$p$. Therefore, $F_1(x_1)/F$ admits a normalised root tower.

Now we take $F_1(x_1)$ as the new base field in place of $F$, and
likewise we have a root tower from $F_1(x_1)$ to $F_2$ with
$F_2\supset F(z_{p_2})$. Going through the same motions we conclude
that $F_2(x_2)/F_2$ is a radical extension, so $F_2(x_2)/F_1(x_1)$ has
a normalised root tower. We continue in this manner until all the
$x_i$'s have been exhausted, and our desired extension has the form
$F_n(x_n)$. Diagramatically, this process is represented by the
following diagram:

{% include figure.html src="normalised-root-tower.svg"
alt="Diagram of proof"
figno=1
caption="" %}

We are done. $\qed$

Now on to the main result. Let $f(x)$ have solvable Galois group
$G$. Then its composition series

$$G = G_1\supset G_2\supset \cdots \supset G_n = 1$$

has factors with prime indices. It corresponds to a tower of simple
extensions with prime degrees, much like in the lemma. If $n>1$ then
the argument is completely the same as in the lemma.

If $n=1$, then $G$ has prime order $p$, and the splitting field is a
simple extension $F(x)/F$. By the lemma we have that $F(z_p)/F$ is
contained in some $K/F$ admitting a normalised root tower, and
$K(x)/K$ is a radical extension, so we are done. $\qed$

One might wonder why we couldn't have proved the main result straight
away without the lemma, via induction on the degree. The reason is
that in the case $n=1$, the extension $F(x)/F$ has no proper
nontrivial subextensions to perform the induction on.

### A bunch of computations

Now I will proceed to compute normalised root towers for $\Q(z_5)/\Q$
and $\Q(z_7)/\Q$.

#### 1. $\Q(z_5)/\Q$

Let $z=z_5$. Then $\Q(z)/\Q$ can be decomposed as a tower

$$\Q \subset \Q(z+\ol z) \subset \Q(z).$$

We have that $z+\ol z$ is fixed precisely by the subgroup
$\\{1,\eta:z\mapsto z^4\\}$ of $\Gal(\Q(z)/\Q)\cong\Z_4$, so it has
degree 2 over $\Q$. Its minpoly is easily seen to be $x^2+x-1$, whose
roots are $(\pm\sqrt5-1)/2$. Therefore $\Q(z+\ol z)=\Q(\sqrt5)$. Since
$z$ lies to the right of the $y$-axis, its $x$ component $z+\ol z$ is
positive so $z+\ol z=(\sqrt5-1)/2$. The $y$-component is given by

$$+\sqrt{1-\left({\sqrt5-1 \over 2}\right)^2} = {\sqrt{2\sqrt{5}-5}\over 2}.$$

Thus

$$z = {\sqrt{5}-1+i(\sqrt{2\sqrt5-5}) \over 2} = {\sqrt{5}-1+\sqrt{5-2\sqrt5} \over 2},$$

and we have $\Q(z)=\Q(\sqrt5,\sqrt{5-2\sqrt5})$. The normalised root tower is thus

$$\Q \subset \Q(\sqrt5) \subset \Q(\sqrt5, \sqrt{5-2\sqrt5}).$$

#### 2. $\Q(z_7)/\Q$

Let $z=z_7$. The Galois group $\Gal(\Q(z)/\Q)$ is generated by the
automorphism $\eta:z\mapsto z^3$, so the automorphism $z\mapsto
z^{3^2}=z^2$ generates a subgroup of order 3. The corresponding
subfield is $\Q(z+z^2+z^4)$, where $z+z^2+z^4\nin\Q$ because it is not
fixed by every automorphism. Its minpoly is $x^2+x+2$, whose roots are
$(\pm\sqrt{-7}+1)/2$. Therefore $\Q(z+z^2+z^4)=\Q(\sqrt{-7})$. In
fact, $z+z^2+z^4=(\sqrt{-7}+1)/2$, because its $y$-component

$$\sin(2\pi/7)+\sin(4\pi/7)+\sin(8\pi/7)$$

is positive, owing to the fact that

$$\sin(2\pi/7)+\sin(4\pi/7) > \sin(2\pi/7) > \sin(6\pi/7) = -\sin(8\pi/7).$$

Now we augment $\Q(\sqrt{-7})$ with a primitive 3rd root of unity
$\omega=e^{2\pi i/3}$ and apply the procedure in the proof of
Jacobson's lemma to express $\Q(\omega,z)/\Q(\omega,\sqrt{-7})$ as a
radical extension. Since $\Q(z)/\Q(\sqrt{-7})$ has degree 3, the
extension $\Q(\omega,z)/\Q(\omega,\sqrt{-7})$ has degree either 1 or
3; but $z\nin\Q(\omega,\sqrt{-7})$ since otherwise it has degree $\le
4$ over $\Q$ which is not the case. Thus the degree is 3 and its
Galois group is forced to be generated by the automorphism
$\eta:z\mapsto z^2$. The Lagrange resolvents are

$$z+z^2+z^4,\quad z+z^2\omega+z^4\omega^2 \quad\text{and}\quad z+z^2\omega^2+z^4\omega.$$

The first resolvent is in $\Q(\omega,\sqrt{-7})$, but the latter two
are not because they are not fixed by $\eta$. Let's choose the second
resolvent. In the proof of Jacobson's lemma it is shown that the cube
of the resolvent is an element of $\Q(\omega,\sqrt{-7})$, and that the
resolvent generates $\Q(\omega,z)$. Thus we just have to compute the
cube to express $\Q(\omega,z)/\Q(\omega,\sqrt{-7})$ as a radical
extension. Annoyingly, I don't know of an easier way to calculate the
cube without manually expanding everything out, so I enlisted the help
of Mathematica. Luckily, it simplified down to a relatively tame expression:

$$(z+z^2\omega+z^4\omega^2)^3 = 2(4+z+z^2+z^4) + \omega(3+6z+6z^2+6z^4).$$

Subbing in $\omega=(\sqrt{-3}-1)/2$ (which I assume is known) and
$z+z^2+z^4=(\sqrt{-7}+1)/2$ we have the element

$${12-3\sqrt{21}+6\sqrt{-3}-\sqrt{-7} \over 2}.$$

Thus the normalised root tower is

$$\Q \subset \Q(\sqrt{-7}) \subset
\Q(\sqrt{-3},\sqrt{-7})=\Q(\omega,\sqrt{-7}) \subset
\Q(\sqrt{-3},\sqrt{-7},\sqrt[3]{12-3\sqrt{21}+6\sqrt{-3}-\sqrt{-7}
\over 2}).$$