# Deriving $\Aut(Q_8)$

In this entry I derive the fact $\Aut(Q_8) \cong S_4$, making use of
some beautiful observations.

Recall that $Q_8 = \{\pm1,\pm i,\pm j,\pm k\}$ is generated by the
elements $-1$, $i$, $j$ and $k$ under the relations

$$(-1)^2=1 \quad\text{and}\quad i^2=j^2=k^2=ijk=-1.$$

This is not a minimal set of generators and relations, but it is the
most appropriate choice for my argument. Now let $\varphi\in
\Aut(Q_8)$. Straight away, we can already deduce that $\varphi$ fixes
$1$ and $-1$, since they are the only order $1$ and $2$ elements
respectively. Hence, $\varphi$ can be thought of as a permutation of
the remaining 6 elements $\{\pm i,\pm j,\pm k\}$.

There are restrictions on what permutations are allowed. The first set
of restrictions is

$$\begin{align*}
\varphi(-i) &= -\varphi(i) \\
\varphi(-j) &= -\varphi(j) \\
\varphi(-k) &= -\varphi(k).
\end{align*}$$

This can be formalised as follows: $\varphi$ preserves the grouping of
$\{i,-i\}$, $\{j,-j\}$ and $\{k,-k\}$---that is, $\varphi$ sends each
set into another one of those sets. There are no restrictions on the
permutations of the sets, as well as the permutation of elements
within each set, so the subgroup of $S_6$ preserving grouping is the
wreath product

$$S_2 \wr S_3 \cong (S_2 \times S_2 \times S_2) \rtimes S_3,$$

which has $2^3\cdot6 = 48$ elements.

Still, not every permutation in the wreath product is
allowed. Consider the case where $\varphi$ maps $i \mapsto j$, $j
\mapsto i$ and $k \mapsto k$. It can be seen that

$$\varphi(ij) = k \neq -k = \varphi(i)\varphi(j),$$

so $\varphi$ is not actually an automorphism. In general, the second
restriction comes from the relation $ijk=-1$: applying $\varphi$ to
both sides yields

$$\begin{equation}
\label{eq:varphi-relation}
\varphi(i)\varphi(j)\varphi(k) = -1.
\end{equation}$$

This is where I had a brilliant idea. I imagined that the product
$ijk$ represented the identity matrix $I =
\begin{pmatrix}\hat\i & \hat\j &
\hat k\end{pmatrix}$; then, I interpreted the statement $ijk=-1$ as
saying that $I$ has *negative* orientation. Following through
with this idea and \eqref{eq:varphi-relation}, $\Aut(Q_8)$ can now be
thought of as the group of 'orientation-preserving' permutations! The
idea actually makes sense: the permutation swapping $i$ and $j$ is
'orientation-reversing', and so is the permutation sending $i$ to
$-i$. On the other hand, the permutation mapping $i \mapsto j$, $j
\mapsto k$ and $k \mapsto i$ is 'orientation-preserving'.

This idea can be made precise: recall that each automorphism $\varphi$
is determined by its action on $i$, $j$ and $k$. We can then associate
$\varphi$ with a linear isomorphism of $\R^3$ by replacing those
elements as basis vectors. Specifically, $\varphi$ is a *signed
permutation matrix*: a permutation matrix whose nonzero entries can be
$\pm1$.

As shown above, the group $G$ of signed permutation matrices has order
$48$ and is isomorphic to $S_2 \wr S_3$. Then, $\Aut(Q_8)$ is the
kernel of the determinant homomorphism from $G$ to $C_2$, consisting
of the orientation-preserving matrices. Hence, we have $|\Aut(Q_8)| =
|G|/|C_2| = 24$. Finally, it is easily seen that the subgroup of
orientation-preserving matrices is isomorphic to the symmetry group of
the cube, proving $\Aut(Q_8) \cong S_4$.

It is very tempting to think that if higher-dimensional analogues of
$Q_8$ exist, then the preceding argument can be easily
generalised. For example, is there a version of $Q_8$ but with the
elements $i$, $j$, $k$ and $l$?
