# Some remarks on $\Th\N$


This is basically a summary of ch1 of Kaye's *Models of Peano
Arithmetic* which lays out some basic ideas. Let $\cL_A$ be the
language consisting of constant symbols 0 and 1, binary function
symbols $+$ and $\cdot$, and a binary predicate symbol $<$. $\N$ can
be made in an $\cL_A$-structure in the obvious way. $\Th\N$ denotes
the set of all sentences satisfied by $\N$, i.e. $\{\sigma\mid
\N\vDash\sigma\}$.

Let $M$ be a model of $\Th\N$, in other words $\N\vDash\sigma\implies
M\vDash\sigma$. I will go through some basic properties of
$M$. Firstly $\N$ and $M$ are elementarily equivalent, because
$M\vDash\sigma\implies \N\vDash\sigma$ is equivalent to the
implication $\N\vDash\neg\sigma\implies M\vDash\neg\sigma$. In
particular, given a formula $\psi(x)$ we have $M\vDash\exists
x\,\psi(x) \implies \N\vDash\exists x\,\psi(x)$. This means that a
formula with a solution in $M$ also has a solution in $\N$, even
though $M$ might be strictly larger (as explained next).

Secondly, $M$ can contain non-standard or `infinitely large'
elements. To be precise, let $\underline{n}$ denote the $\cL_A$-term
$(((1+1)+1)+\ldots+1)$ (where 1 is repeated $n$ times), and let
$\underline{n}^M$ be its interpretation in $M$. Then there is a model
$M$ and an element $a\in M$ such that for $a>\underline{n}^M$ for all
$n\in\N$. The proof is a standard application of the compactness
theorem: extend $\cL_A$ to $\cL'$ by adding a new constant symbol $c$,
and observe that the set of $\cL'$-sentences

$$\Th\N \cup \{c>\underline{n}\mid n\in\N\}$$

is finitely satisfiable, hence satisfied by some model $M$. Then we
set $a=c^M$ (the interpretation of $c$ in $M$).

Even though $M$ may be larger than $\N$, there is an obvious embedding
$f:\N\to M$ mapping $n\mapsto\underline{n}^M$. It is injective because

$$n\neq m \implies \N\vDash\underline{n}\neq\underline{m} \implies
M\vDash\underline{n}\neq\underline{m}.$$

It respects $+$ because

$$n+m=k \implies \N\vDash\underline{n}+\underline{m}=\underline{k}
\implies M\vDash\underline{n}+\underline{m}=\underline{k}.$$

And we show similarly that $f$ respects $\cdot$ and $<$, so $f$ is in
fact an embedding of $\cL_A$-structures, and we can treat $\N$ as a
substructure of $M$. In addition, $f$ is an elementary embedding. To
recap the definition: given a formula $\varphi(x_1,\ldots,x_n)$ and
$a_1,\ldots,a_n\in\N$, we have

$$\N\vDash\varphi(a_1,\ldots,a_n) \iff M\vDash\varphi(a_1,\ldots,a_n).$$

Furthermore, $\N$ is an initial segment of $M$, or in other words $M$
is an end extension of $\N$. This means every nonstandard element of
$M$ must be infinitely large. We prove this by considering the
sentence

$$\forall x(x<\underline{k}\to x=\underline0\lor x=\underline1\lor
\ldots\lor x=\underline{k-1}).$$

The above discussion is quite trivial if you're comfortable with the
basic definitions in logic, so let's move on to more interesting
things.

**Proposition.** Let $\theta(x)$ be a formula with one free variable
$x$. Then

$$\N\vDash\theta(\underline{k})\ \text{for arbitrarily large $k\in\N$}
\iff M\vDash\theta(a)\ \text{for some nonstandard $a$}.$$

*Proof.* ($\imp$) We have $\N\vDash \forall x\exists y(\theta(y)\land
y>x)$, so the same is true in $M$. Taking $x$ to be nonstandard, there
exists some nonstandard $y$ such that $M\vDash\theta(y)$.

($\impd$) For each $n\in\N$ we have $M\vDash \exists x(\theta(x)\land
x>\underline{n})$, since $x$ can always be taken to be $a$. Therefore
the same is true in $\N$, meaning that $\N\vDash\theta(\underline{k})$
for arbitrarily large $k$. $\qed$

A neat consequence of this proposition is showing that $\N$ is not a
definable subset of $M$. That is, there is no formula $\psi(x)$ such
that $M\models\psi(a) \iff a\in\N$. For if such a formula existed,
than it is true for arbitrarily large naturals, hence true for a
nonstandard element.

The next concept is about coding an arbitrary subset of $\N$ as some
nonstandard element $c\in M$. Let $S\subseteq\N$ be any subset and
$p_n$ denote the $n$th prime. By compactness, there is a model $M$ and
an element $c\in M$ such that

$$M\vDash \exists x(x\cdot \underline{p_k}=c) \iff k\in S.$$

Conversely, given some $c$ we have the subset $\{k\mid M\vDash \exists
x(x\cdot\underline{p_k}=c)\}\subseteq\N$. There is a surprising
application of this correspondence in the following result:

**Proposition.** There are $2^{\aleph_0}$ non-isomorphic countable
  models of $\Th\N$.

*Proof.* There are at most $2^{\aleph_0}$ of them, so it suffices to
 show the upper bound is attained. If there were only
 $\kappa<2^{\aleph_0}$ countable models, then the number of subsets
 coded by elements in all these models is at most
 $\kappa\cdot\aleph_0$ which is less than $2^{\aleph_0}$. But there
 are $2^{\aleph_0}$ subsets of $\N$. $\qed$