# I've read The Art of Computer Programming, Chapter 1

I've decided to tackle The Art of Computer Programming (TAOCP), an
absolutely massive work (in progress) by Donald Knuth currently
spanning 5+ volumes. The last few months were devoted to the first
chapter alone, as I slowly inched my way through its 500+
exercises. I'd like to share some of the joy I experienced in the
process.

Chapter 1 begins with a heavy dose of mathematical
preliminaries. Frankly I considered skipping it and moving on to the
programming content, but ultimately I do not regret taking my time
here. The exercises are genuinely some of the best I've seen in a math
text: although they deal with basic topics like summations, logarithms
and Fibonacci numbers, they reveal a whole universe of interesting
facts and theory that you won't see in any other "introductory" text.
They are also delightfully instructive in reinforcing or sometimes
extending the techniques presented in the text. For example, 1.2.3
"Summations" introduces the basic change of summation identity

\begin{equation}
\label{1}
\sum_{i=1}^n\sum_{j=1}^ia_{ij}=\sum_{j=1}^n\sum_{i=j}^na_{ij}
\end{equation}

which is then used to derive the identity

\begin{equation}
\label{2}
\sum_{i=0}^n\sum_{j=0}^ia_ia_j={1\over2}\bigl(S_1^2+S_2\bigr),\quad S_k=\sum_{i=0}^na_i^k.
\end{equation}

To see why \eqref{1} is true, one can arrange the elements $a_{ij}$ in
a triangle and observe that the expression on each side corresponds to
summing by rows or summing by columns. Alternatively, the two
summations are equal to a single summation over the set

$$\{(i,j)\mid1\le j\le i\le n\}.$$

Once the reader has internalised this fact, they can generalise it to
$n$-fold summations. When $n=3$, there are $3!=6$ ways to perform a
triple summation over the set

$$\{(i,j,k)\mid1\le k\le j\le i\le n\},$$

namely

$$\sum_{i=1}^n\sum_{j=1}^i\sum_{k=1}^j
= \sum_{i=1}^n\sum_{k=1}^i\sum_{j=k}^i
= \sum_{j=1}^n\sum_{i=j}^n\sum_{k=1}^j
= \sum_{j=1}^n\sum_{k=1}^j\sum_{i=j}^n
= \sum_{k=1}^n\sum_{i=k}^n\sum_{j=k}^i
= \sum_{k=1}^n\sum_{j=k}^n\sum_{i=j}^n\;.$$

This was one of the ideas I used to solve 1.2.3&ndash;29(b), which
asks to extend \eqref{2} by expressing

$$\sum_{i=0}^n\sum_{j=0}^i\sum_{k=0}^ia_ia_ja_k\quad\text{in terms of}\quad S_1,S_2,S_3.$$

Some of my other favourite exercises are: 1.2.4&ndash;43;
1.2.6&ndash;10; 1.2.7&ndash;15,17; 1.2.8&ndash;17,18,37;
1.2.9&ndash;6,19.

This is not to say that *only* the problems were interesting. There
was some cool math to be enjoyed from reading the later sections on
generating functions and asymptotic expansions. The final section of
the mathematical preliminaries, 1.2.11.3 "Some Asymptotic
Calculations", was by far the most challenging. Despite Knuth's claim
that this is all "elementary calculus", you need a solid grasp of real
analysis to follow the math. But for the mathematically inclined
reader, it is a truly awesome demonstration of how one can derive
bewildering approximations like

$$1+{n\over n+1}+{n\over n+1}{n\over n+2}+\cdots
= \sqrt{\pi n\over2}+{1\over3}+{1\over12}\sqrt{\pi\over2n}+{4\over135n}+{1\over288n}\sqrt{\pi\over2n^3}+O(n^{-2}).$$

Reading this section was like watching a musician perform a
technically demanding concerto.

<br>

The second half of Chapter 1 is about the fictional computer
architecture MIX. I am aware that MIX is outdated in favour of MMIX,
but I stuck with it anyway because I have a fascination with old
computers, with their punched cards and typewriters and magnetic
tapes. Sometimes I wish I were around in an earlier era to play around
with these big machines, whose inner workings were more transparent
than today's computers. Anyway, I digress.

After teaching the basics of MIX and the assembly language MIXAL,
Knuth introduces some algorithms for multiplying and inverting
permutations (stored as arrays) in 1.3.3.  They are certainly
interesting in their own right (Boothroyd's algorithm for inverting
permutations is mind-bending), perhaps even useful (because they
modify the array in-place, not allocating extra space).  But Knuth's
point is not to present a bunch of algorithms, but to demonstrate how
an *exact* runtime analysis can be performed.  With his signature
attention to detail, Knuth meticulously counts the number of
executions of each instruction, and assuming each instruction has a
fixed cost (admittedly a tenuous assumption with today's computers),
he derives the exact runtime of the program. I felt that working
through this section sometimes required a bit of a Zen mindset: you
just shut up and do the computation, and all that work will be for a
single number (check out 1.3.3&ndash;10). Nevertheless, 1.3.3 also
contained juicy material on the theory of permuations like the
Josephus problem; the mathematically-inclined reader might also find
1.3.3&ndash;22 and 37 intriguing.

Following permutations, Knuth finally gets down to talking about
programming. The choice of topics is rather outdated and hardly
suitable for a beginner, but I've learnt a lot from it. While
discussing subroutines, Knuth provides exact expressions for the time
and space savings of using subroutines over copy-pasting the same code
in multiple places. This is certainly useless knowledge, but I very
much appreciate Knuth for showing that such analysis *can* be done. It
was also here that I learnt about coroutines for the first
time. Instead of having a method call a submethod which runs some code
and then returns back to that method, we could have two or more
methods continuously calling each other. It's a notion that I find
easier expressed in assembly than a higher-level language. After
coroutines, Knuth goes through the implementation of a simulator and
tracing routine for MIX, written in MIX itself. It's not as scary as
it sounds, and some of the exercises gleefully embrace its meta nature
(what if we had a tracing routine trace *itself*?)

<br>

In order to run Knuth's MIX examples and work on the programming
exercises, I wrote my own MIX "[software
suite](https://github.com/greysome/mmmmmix)" consisting of the base
emulator, a MIXAL assembler and a user-friendly debugger. This itself
was an instructive experience, because I've never before written an
emulator, implemented a parser according to an exact specification,
nor iterated on a UI with useful feedback (from myself).

I am quite proud of some of the features I've implemented, because I
don't see them in other MIX distributions ☺. These include the ability
to view execution counts and times (so I can confirm that DIV
instruction in line 19 of Program P was executed 9538 times), as well
as custom simulations of I/O delays, to add a touch of realism to
1.4.4 "Input and Output". Also I can't resist sharing this: I've added
to Knuth's MIX simulator the ability to load MIX programs from punched
cards (which are actually just text files with a slightly extended MIX
character encoding). So if you desire, you can relive some of the joy
of programming in the old days. (To prove my simulator works, [Day 1
of Advent of Code
2024](https://github.com/greysome/mmmmmix/blob/main/examples/mixsim/aoc1/aoc1-program.cards)
can be solved using punched cards.)

<br>

And that's my journey through Chapter 1! I plan to continue with
Chapter 2, though I'll be busier with university work. For the
interested reader, I have some final thoughts to offer:

1. I agree with the consensus that for most aspiring readers, there
are better textbooks to choose from. This book really gets into the
weeds, and following it all the way through requires a significant
time commitment, without an immediate practical payoff. Yet, the
intellectual stimulation provided by TAOCP is sufficient motivation
for some people like me.

2. To grasp the material in TAOCP, it is obviously necessary to do
many exercises. At the same time, working through them has made me
realise how much I *haven't* grasped. For example, I've skipped many
exercises in 1.2.6 "Binomial Coefficients", and I consider this to be
a gaping hole in my understanding.

    Also, Knuth's difficulty ratings for the exercises can sometimes
be humbling. I've often agonized over 20+ rated exercises, only to see
Knuth effortlessly present the solution in a few lines (might I add
it's sometimes really non-obvious). Therefore, this book can have a
curious effect: the more you work through it, the less you know.

3. Despite the gloomy-sounding remark above, I strongly recommend
anyone brave enough to work through TAOCP to **read all the
solutions**. I've learnt so much just by seeing how Knuth approached
an exercise, even if I've solved it on my own (though I've perhaps
given up on exercises more often). Sometimes he inserts additional
remarks, like the motivation behind the exercise or references to the
literature.

    I think this can be contrasted with a certain attitude with math
readers: "I have to solve every exercise on my own". While there is
some truth in that you should first invest some effort into the
exercise, I feel that adopting such a hardline stance can shut off
valuable learning opportunities when you *can't* solve it.

4. If you know some programming, learning MIX/MMIX is not as scary as
it sounds; I'd say it requires a few days. In fact, doing all the
exercises in 1.3.1 and 1.3.2 will quickly acquaint you with its
nuances.